So Tom went to the gate of the palace and looked through it.
There were two soldiers standing there, one on each side of the gate.
They wouldn't let Tom come close.
He saw a great many fine gentlemen and ladies coming and going
inside, but he did not see the prince. He went to the gate day after day.
Then one day he saw a boy coming out of the door of the palace. The
boy came quite near to the gate. Tom ran to the gate so as to see him
better. "I want to see the prince!" he cried.
One of the soldiers said: "Keep back!" and he hit Tom. He hit him
so hard that Tom fell down on the ground.
The prince saw this, and he was angry.
"Why did you hit the poor boy?" he said. "Open the gate, and
bring him in."
"He's only a poor beggar boy," said the soldier.
"The king, my father, is king of all the people, rich and poor,”
said Prince Edward. "Bring the boy in."
So the soldier opened the gate and brought Tom in.
"Come with me," said the prince. "Tell me who you are and why
you want to see me so much. You have come to the gate day after day.
I've seen you from my window."
Then the prince led Tom to a room inside the palace. He called a
servant. "Bring food,” he said.
So the servant brought food and put it on the table. Tom had never
eaten such nice food before.
"Now”, said the prince, "tell me about yourself. What's your
name? Where do you live?"
"I live with my father and mother and grandmother and my two
sisters in a room in Pudding Lane."
"In one room?" said the prince. "Do you all live in one room?"
"Oh, yes," said Tom.
"There are hundreds of rooms in this palace. Why do you all live
in one room?"
"We're very poor," said Tom. "My father sends me out to beg for
money. If I don't bring back enough money, he beats me."
"Your father beats you!" cried the prince. "I shall send my
soldiers to beat him!"
"No, no!” said Tom, That would make my mother and my sisters
unhappy."
"I have three sisters," said the prince. "Lady Elizabeth and Lady
Jane and Lady Mary. Lady Elizabeth is very wise; Lady Jane reads
books and is very kind. But I don’t like Lady Mary: she never laughs or
plays with me. Do you play with other boys?"
"Yes, of course I do!"
"I don't. What do you play?"
"I play with a ball, and I play by the river and I swim. And
sometimes I play at being a prince.”
"I would like to play at being a poor boy like you, and play by the
river, and swim. Let's change clothes. Just for a little time you shall be
the prince and I'll be the poor beggar boy. Come!"
The prince began to take off his fine clothes, and Tom took off his
old clothes and put on the clothes of the prince.
Tom looked at the prince as he stood there dressed in Tom's
clothes. He had seen someone very like him before. Where had he seen
him? The prince was very like...
"Come and look here!" cried the prince. "Come and look at us in
the glass!"
They were just like each other. The prince looked just like Tom,
now that he was dressed in the beggar boy's clothes, and Tom looked
just like the prince.
"Stay here till I come back,” said the prince. He quickly took up a
small round heavy thing from the table and put it in a safe place as he
ran out of the door.
Tom stood there alone.
